---
layout: post
title: 'Incomplete Repositories Considered Harmful'
author: waldoj
---

* governments maintain data repositories—states, cities, counties, even the U.S. government
* a reasonable person looking for government data would look at one of these sites and conclude that it must comprise the whole of that government’s holdings
	* as a rule, it does not
	* Vermont as example?
* we see with LMGTDFY that governments have a great deal of data that's not on their repo
* governments creating repositories should start by inventorying their existing holdings 

An open data repository has become a totem of the open government data movement. No open data effort is considered to be complete—or perhaps even really begun—without a data catalog. Generally at an address like `data.placename.gov`, it functions as a central site that inventories the data holdings of that government, making it easy for people to find data from a given government.

A reasonable person looking for government data who looks at a government’s repository and doesn’t find that data would conclude that it does not exist.

As a rule, this is not true. I am not aware of any government data repository that is complete. Most of them are not even close to being complete. In my experience, the majority of any government’s data holdings are not included in their data repository, when they have one.

Publishing a data repository while omitting data should be considered harmful. An important part of launching a data repository is inventorying existing data holdings, such as with “[Let Me Get That Data For You](http://lmgtdfy.usopendata.org/).” _Existing data holdings_ should serve as the basis for a data repository, and all of them should be included.

Note that this does not require actually hosting all data files in the repository. Internal politics can make it infeasible to copy one agency’s data files over to another agency’s repository, no matter how relevant that those files are. But there is no reason why a repository cannot contain an _entry about_ and a _link to_ data, wherever it may live. (In some government agencies, it is claimed that there is a “rule” against so much as _linking_ to a page on another agency’s website. If you are told this, demand to see a copy of that rule. That rule does not exist.)

